---
layout: post
title: "Bereishit 5776 - &ldquo;Not Too Big for the Small Stuff&rdquo;"
date: "2015-10-10"
author: skatz
sponsor: "the Parness family <br> in memory of Anna Parness a\"h"
learning: "Nach: Yehoshua 9-10<br>Mishnah: Taharot 7:4-5<br>Daf Yomi (Bavli): Nazir 49<br>Halachah: Mishnah Berurah 687:1-688:1"
volume: 30
issue: 1
pdf: "Bereishit 5776.pdf"
---

Three of Rambam&rsquo;s Thirteen Articles of Faith (see back 
page) are that Hashem created the world from nothing, that He is 
aware of man&rsquo;s deeds, and that He rewards and punishes man for 
man&rsquo;s deeds. There are those who deny these beliefs, however, 
claiming that G-d is too awesome and lofty to be concerned with 
the affairs of &ldquo;puny man.&rdquo; R&rsquo; Yisrael Halevi z&rdquo;l (Zamosc, 
Poland; died 1772) explains the fallacy in that argument:

The very premise of these heretics&rsquo; argument is wrong. Who 
says that greatness has to lead to haughtiness? To the contrary, 
haughtiness is usually found in people who lack substance, while 
great people tend to be humble. It follows that Hashem, whose 
greatness is unlimited, is more humble than any being and has no 
difficulty concerning Himself with &ldquo;small&rdquo; things.

The sage Rabbi Yochanan teaches (Megillah 31a), &ldquo;Wherever 
you find Hashem&rsquo;s greatness mentioned, there you find His 
humility.&rdquo; Rabbi Yochanan cites three verses to illustrate this 
principle, and R&rsquo; Yisrael explains that Hashem&rsquo;s loftiness 
encompasses three elements: His power, His eternity, and the 
fact that we cannot fathom Him. We read in Devarim (10:17-18) 
&ldquo;For Hashem, your Elokim--He is the Power over all powers and 
the Lord over all lords, the great, mighty, and awesome Kel, . . 
. \[Nevertheless,\] He carries out the judgment of orphan and 
widow, and He loves the proselyte to give him bread and 
garment.&rdquo; We read in Yeshayah (57:15), &ldquo;For so says the exalted 
and uplifted One, Who abides forever . . . but I am with the 
contrite and lowly of spirit.&rdquo; Finally, we read in Tehilim 
(68:5-6), &ldquo;Extol He Who rides upon the highest heavens . . . 
Father of orphans and Defender of widows.&rdquo; In summary, Hashem&rsquo;s 
greatness is the very reason why He knows and involves Himself 
in the details of everything--something man cannot grasp. (Otzar 
Nechmad al Kuzari p.20)

********

> &ldquo;Hashem Elokim formed the man of dust from the ground, 
> and He blew into his nostrils the soul of life; and 
> vayehi ha&rsquo;adam / man became a living being.&rdquo;  (2:7)

R&rsquo; Yaakov Koppel Lifschutz z&rdquo;l (1730-1787; &ldquo;R&rsquo; Koppel 
Chassid&rdquo;) writes: The Hebrew word &ldquo;vayehi&rdquo; is an acronym of the 
phrase from Kohelet (2:18), &ldquo;U&rsquo;mi yodeah he&rsquo;chacham yihyeh \[oh 
sachal\]&rdquo; / &ldquo;Who knows if he will be wise \[or a fool\].&rdquo; Thus, 
&ldquo;Vayehi ha&rsquo;adam&rdquo; alludes to man&rsquo;s bechirah / free will being 
built into his creation.  (Sha&rsquo;arei Gan Eden 1:2)

********

> &ldquo;The serpent was more cunning than any beast of the 
> field that Hashem Elokim had made. He said to the 
> woman, &lsquo;Did, perhaps, Elokim say that you shall not 
> eat of any tree of the garden?&rsquo;&rdquo; (3:1)

R&rsquo; Chaim of Volozhin z&rdquo;l (1749-1821) writes: Before Adam&rsquo;s 
sin, he certainly had free will and could choose good or its 
opposite. After all, the entire purpose of Creation was to 
create a being that would exercise bechirah. Further evidence of 
the fact that Adam had bechirah is the fact that he did sin. 
However, Adam&rsquo;s bechirah was different than our free will 
because the yetzer hara was not inside him.

R&rsquo; Chaim explains further: Originally, man was an entirely 
holy being and everything about him was holy and perfect. The 
forces of evil were outside of him. Adam had the ability to 
choose incorrectly the same way that any person today has the 
free will to walk into a lit furnace; he had that ability in the 
abstract, but he had no temptation to use that ability. This is 
why the yetzer hara had to take the form of a separate creature 
(the serpent) in order to entice Adam to sin.

After Adam&rsquo;s sin, the situation changed. Now, good and evil 
are mixed-up inside a person. Today, the yetzer hara talks to us 
as if it is ourselves talking, not some external force trying to 
entice us. This is what our Sages mean when they say that the 
serpent contaminated Chava.  (Nefesh Ha&rsquo;Chaim Part I, ch.6)

R&rsquo; Avraham Grodzinski z&rdquo;l Hy&rdquo;d (1883-1944; mashgiach 
ruchani of the Slobodka Yeshiva) elaborates: The difference 
between Adam&rsquo;s bechirah before his sin and after is that his 
choices before the sin were purely intellectual, while his 
choices after the sin had to contend as well with his personal 
&ldquo;ratzon&rdquo; / will. That made Adam and his descendants more likely 
to sin in the future. Adam himself had no desire to sin; indeed, 
there is no indication that he sinned again during his very long 
life. Rather, he ate from the Etz Ha&rsquo;da&rsquo;at because he wanted to 
strengthen his yetzer hara so that, in his view, he would 
perform a greater mitzvah by resisting it thereafter. But, that 
was not Hashem&rsquo;s Will. Notably, while the Torah does not mention 
any further sins by Adam, nor does it mention any good deeds he 
did. By trying to serve Hashem differently than Hashem intended, 
he made himself irrelevant.  (Torat Avraham pp.58 & 68)

********

> &ldquo;Kayin left the presence of Hashem . . .&rdquo; (4:16)

Midrash Rabbah comments: After Kayin finished his 
discussion with Hashem, he met Adam, who asked the outcome of 
Kayin&rsquo;s judgment. Kayin replied, &ldquo;I did teshuvah and a 
compromise was reached \[i.e., the decree that Kayin would have 
to wander for the rest of his life was softened\].&rdquo;

Adam replied: &ldquo;Is the power of teshuvah that great?&rdquo; 
Immediately he proclaimed (in the words of Tehilim 92:1-2), &ldquo;A 
psalm, a song for the Shabbat day. It is good to thank Hashem . 
. .&rdquo; \[Until here from the midrash\]

Why did Adam respond in this way? R&rsquo; Nosson Sternhartz z&rdquo;l 
(1780-1845; foremost student of R&rsquo; Nachman of Breslov z&rdquo;l) 
explains:

After Adam&rsquo;s sin of eating from the Etz Ha&rsquo;da&rsquo;at, the world 
fell into a spiritual depression. All of history since then has 
been an effort to restore the world to its ideal state as it was 
before Adam sinned, a task that will not be completed until the 
World-to-Come. But, our Sages teach that Shabbat is a microcosm 
of the World-to-Come. Thus, writes R&rsquo; Nosson, we &ldquo;repair&rdquo; this 
world&rsquo;s &ldquo;depression&rdquo; little-by-little by bringing the joy of 
Shabbat into the everyday world.

He continues: It was the holiness of Shabbat that inspired 
Adam to recognize the potential for repentance. He recognized 
that despite his terrible sin, Hashem continued to do kindness 
for him, including bringing him into Shabbat, and he was 
grateful for this continued relationship. Seeing this, he 
realized that the best chance for all future generations to come 
close to Hashem and to repair his error, and themselves, was 
through appreciating whatever Hashem gave them and giving thanks 
for it. Thus, he exclaimed, &ldquo;A psalm, a song for the Shabbat 
day. It is good to thank Hashem.&rdquo;  (Likkutei Halachot: Hil. 
Kilei Behaimah 4:11)

********

One of the seven names of G-d that may not be erased is 
spelled shin-dalet-yud. The Gemara (Chagigah 12a) interprets 
this Name as a contraction of the phrase: &ldquo;She&rsquo;amar l&rsquo;olamo die&rdquo; 
/ &ldquo;He said &lsquo;Enough!&rsquo; to His world.&rdquo; This is usually understood 
to mean that the physical universe would have expanded 
indefinitely, but Hashem placed limits on it.

R&rsquo; Meshulam Feivish Heller z&rdquo;l (1740-1795; Zbarazh, 
Ukraine; early chassidic rebbe) explains the Gemara more deeply 
in the name of his teacher, the maggid R&rsquo; Yechiel Michel of 
Zlotchov z&rdquo;l (1721-1786), a student of the Ba&rsquo;al Shem Tov:

Hashem&rsquo;s act of Creation was a process in which a physical 
world appeared out of a world that was entirely spiritual. 
Within this physical world, spirituality became concealed, a 
process known as &ldquo;hishtalshelut.&rdquo;

Hashem created the physical world so that He can, so-to-
speak, derive pleasure when man uses his free will to overcome 
the darkness of the physical world and behave in a spiritual 
manner. It follows that Hashem would derive even greater 
&ldquo;pleasure&rdquo; if spirituality were concealed in this physical world 
even more than it is now. Therefore, the hishtalshelut should 
have continued even further. Nevertheless, Hashem knows that man 
could not overcome the challenges of the physical world if 
spirituality were concealed even more. Therefore, He said, 
&ldquo;Enough!&rdquo;  (Yosher Divrei Emet ch.13)

********

Zemirot Shabbat

The custom of singing zemirot is mentioned in the Gemara 
(Megillah 12b). The Gemara quotes the verse (Esther 1:10), &ldquo;On 
the seventh day, when the heart of the King was merry with wine 
. . .&rdquo; The Gemara asks: Before the seventh day of the feast, was 
Achashveirosh&rsquo;s heart not merry with wine? Rather, says the 
Gemara, the &ldquo;seventh day&rdquo; referred to here was Shabbat, and the 
verse is drawing a contrast between Achashveirosh&rsquo;s behavior on 
that day and the behavior of his Jewish subjects, who were 
sitting at home, eating, drinking, saying divrei Torah and 
singing praises of Hashem.

Likewise, zemirot Shabbat are mentioned in the Zohar (Eikev 
272b): &ldquo;On Shabbat, one must add to everything that he uses/does 
on weekdays--to his food, to his drink, to his clothing, etc. 
One must set the place he reclines beautifully with embroidered 
pillows, whatever he has in the house, like someone who is 
preparing a chuppah for a bride. . .  One must awaken song and 
joy at the table.&rdquo;

Why do we sing zemirot on Shabbat?

R&rsquo; Yehuda He&rsquo;chassid z&rdquo;l (Germany; 1150-1217) writes: We 
read (Bereishit 2:3), &ldquo;Elokim blessed the seventh day.&rdquo; We are 
not told in what way He blessed the day, but we may infer the 
answer from another set of verses. We read (Iyov 2:14), &ldquo;After 
that, Iyov opened his mouth and cursed his day&rdquo; \[i.e., the day 
he was conceived\]. Iyov cursed that day with darkness (Iyov 
3:2), implying that a day that is blessed (Shabbat) is filled 
with light. Iyov cursed that day that it have no song (Iyov 
3:6), implying that a day that is blessed is full of song. 
Therefore, it is a mitzvah to sit and sing praises, as we read 
(Tehilim 92:1), &ldquo;A mizmor, a song to the Shabbat day: it is good 
to thank Hashem and to sing to Your Name on high.&rdquo;  (Sefer 
Ha&rsquo;chassidim 271)
