---
layout: post
title: "Matot-Mas'ei 5775 - &ldquo;Speak Like a Man&rdquo;"
date: "2015-07-18"
author: skatz
sponsor: 
learning: "Nach: Mishlei 17-18<br>Mishnah: Negaim 14:1-2<br>Daf Yomi (Bavli): Nedarim 55<br>Halachah: Mishnah Berurah 629:9-11"
volume: 29
issue: 38
pdf: "Matot-Masei 5775"
---

We read at the beginning of our parashah (30:3), &ldquo;If a man 
takes a vow to Hashem or swears an oath to establish a 
prohibition upon himself, he shall not profane his word.&rdquo; Our 
Sages interpret this verse: &ldquo;He shall not profane his word, but 
others may profane his word&rdquo;--teaching that a person who took a 
vow may, under certain circumstances, have the vow annulled by a 
Torah scholar. The Rambam counts annulling vows as one of the 
613 mitzvot.

R&rsquo; Moshe Shick z&rdquo;l (1807-1879; rabbi of Huszt, Hungary) 
writes that there is a profound lesson to be learned from this 
mitzvah. It teaches that human speech is not a physical 
characteristic of man. Rather, it is a spiritual characteristic. 
On the verse (Bereishit 2:7), &ldquo;Hashem Elokim formed the man of 
dust from the ground, and He blew into his nostrils the soul of 
life; and man became a living being,&rdquo; the Aramaic translation 
and commentary Onkelos states: &ldquo;He blew into him a spirit that 
speaks.&rdquo; Speech is the connection between the intellect/soul and 
the body. Therefore, only thoughtful speech is worthy of being 
called human speech. Speech should be used for prayer and Torah 
study, because speech is the outward expression of the soul.

How do we know this? From the fact that it is possible to 
annul vows. When a Torah scholar annuls a vow, he is able to do 
so because the person who made the vow presents evidence that he 
took the vow without proper forethought. He declares that, had 
he thought of such-and-such or known this-or-that, he never 
would have taken the vow. Speech without proper thought is not 
human speech, and that is why the Torah scholar may declare it 
null and void as if it never existed. Proper speech, on the 
other hand, is thoughtful speech. (Maharam Shick Al Taryag 
Mitzvot)

********

&ldquo;He shall not desecrate his word; according to 
whatever comes from his mouth shall he do.&rdquo;  (30:3)

R&rsquo; Yehoshua Leib Diskin z&rdquo;l (1817-1898; rabbi of Brisk, 
Poland; later in Yerushalayim) was once present at a hesped / 
eulogy for one his students. Following the hesped, a &ldquo;Kail 
Malai&rdquo; was recited, and the assembled crowd dispersed.

R&rsquo; Diskin then approached the gabbai and handed him a coin. 
He said, &ldquo;I am giving this coin to charity in memory of the 
deceased on behalf of everyone who was present today.&rdquo; He 
explained: When the gabbai recites a Kail Malai, he often says 
the phrase, &ldquo;in the merit that all of the congregation promises 
to give charity on behalf of the elevation of the soul (of the 
departed).&rdquo; I, said R&rsquo; Diskin, am afraid that people will forget 
to fulfill this vow that was made on their behalf, so I am 
acting as their representative.  (Quoted in Ve&rsquo;karata La&rsquo;Shabbat 
Oneg)

********

&ldquo;Moshe was angry with the commanders of the army, the 
officers of the thousands and the officers of the 
hundreds, who came from the legion of the battle.&rdquo;  
(31:14)

Why was Moshe angry? Did the officers disobey any 
commandment of the Torah or any command Moshe had given them?

R&rsquo; Yehuda He&rsquo;chassid z&rdquo;l (Germany; 1150-1217) explains: 
Even if one was never taught or never commanded about something, 
if he is intelligent enough that he should have known, he is 
held accountable. Moshe knew that these officers were wise and 
knowledgeable in Torah and that they could have figured out what 
was expected of them even without an explicit commandment. 
Therefore, he was angry at them.  (Sefer Chassidim, no. 153)

********

&ldquo;Then you shall be vindicated \[literally, &lsquo;clean&rsquo;\] 
before Hashem and from Yisrael.&rdquo; (32:22)

R&rsquo; Moshe Sofer z&rdquo;l (1762-1839; rabbi and rosh yeshiva in 
Pressburg, Hungary; known as the Chatam Sofer) writes in a 
letter to a student:

Shalom to you and shalom to your helpmate, my veteran 
student!

You have described to me your doings, which did not bring 
me pleasure. Know, my son and student, may you live long, that I 
have always worried about the verse, &ldquo;You shall be clean before 
Hashem and from Yisrael.&rdquo; These two obligations--being innocent 
in the eyes of Hashem and being innocent in the eyes of other 
Jews--are two heavy yokes on our backs. Moreover, it is much, 
much easier to fulfill the first one--being innocent in Hashem&rsquo;s 
eyes–than the second--being innocent in man&rsquo;s eyes--because 
people tend to think all kinds of strange thoughts, gossiping 
while spinning thread in the moonlight \[an expression borrowed 
from Sotah 6:1\], etc.  The punishment for not being innocent in 
the eyes of man is likewise very much greater than the 
punishment for not being innocent in Hashem&rsquo;s eyes, for the 
Gemara says at the end of Tractate Yoma that there is no 
atonement for Chillul Hashem / desecration of the Name of G-d, 
may the Merciful One save us. . .

The Chatam Sofer continues: I have thought a great deal 
about whether it is possible at all to observe this mitzvah 
completely. Perhaps it is to this that our Sages refer when they 
say that there is no tzaddik who does good and does not sin. By 
this they mean that even when he does good, it is impossible for 
him not to sin by becoming suspect in the eyes of some people. I 
am not worthy to talk about prior generations; nevertheless, it 
is Torah \[i.e., I am merely interpreting a verse, and therefore 
I may say the following\]. I lean toward saying that the sons of 
Gad and the sons of Reuven, to whom this verse was said \[after 
they asked to receive their portion on the east bank of the 
Jordan\], and who did their best to vindicate themselves by 
serving as the vanguard of the army for 14 years, did not 
completely fulfill their obligation to vindicate themselves. 
After all, it is not for nothing that these tribes were exiled 
before all the other tribes. Our Sages apply to them the verse 
(Mishlei 20:21), &ldquo;If an inheritance is seized hastily in the 
beginning, its end will not be blessed.&rdquo;  (She&rsquo;eilot U&rsquo;teshuvot 
Chatam Sofer VI no.59)

*********

&ldquo;Speak to Bnei Yisrael and say to them, &lsquo;Ki you are 
crossing the Jordan to the land of Canaan – you shall 
drive out all the inhabitants of the Land before you; 
and you shall destroy all their prostration stones; 
all their molten images shall you destroy; and all 
your high places shall you demolish&rsquo;.&rdquo;  (33:51-52)

The word &ldquo;ki&rdquo; in this verse usually is translated &ldquo;when,&rdquo; 
so that the verse would say, &ldquo;When you cross the Jordan . . . .&rdquo; 
However, writes R&rsquo; Yosef Chaim David Azulai z&rdquo;l (1724-1806; 
Eretz Yisrael and Italy), it also can be translated &ldquo;because.&rdquo; 
He explains: Our Sages say that if Moshe Rabbeinu had entered 
Eretz Yisrael, he would have destroyed the yetzer hara for 
idolatry. Furthermore, Bnei Yisrael would have entered a Garden 
of Eden-like existence.

However, this was not to be; Moshe Rabbeinu was not going 
to enter the Holy Land. Therefore, Hashem commanded him to say, 
&ldquo;Because you – but not I – are crossing the Jordan,&rdquo; therefore I 
must caution you to destroy all vestiges of idolatry.  (Nachal 
Kedumim)

********

&ldquo;The kohanim did not say, &lsquo;Where is Hashem?&rsquo;--even 
those charged with teaching the Torah did not know Me 
. . .&rdquo;  (From the haftarah–Yirmiyah 2:8)

R&rsquo; Yisrael Meir Kagan z&rdquo;l (the Chafetz Chaim; died 1933) 
explains: The prophet Yirmiyah is bemoaning the fact that in the 
period just before the destruction of the (first) Bet Hamikdash, 
even the kohanim--those individuals devoted to serving Hashem, 
and who were accustomed to seeing miracles on a daily basis (see 
Avot 5:5)--did not recognize His Providence. This can only be 
because they removed Hashem from their thoughts. Likewise, those 
entrusted with studying and teaching the Torah did not look in 
the Torah for lessons about His great mercy, for if they had, 
they would immediately have returned to Hashem.  (Ahavat 
Chessed: Preface)

********

Shabbat Preparations: Body and Soul

One should arise early on Erev Shabbat to prepare what is 
needed for Shabbat. One should make an effort to be personally 
involved in Shabbat preparations \[i.e., men should not leave 
Shabbat preparations to their wives alone, nor should the 
preparations be left to household help\].  (Shulchan Aruch 250:1)

R&rsquo; Yisrael Meir Hakohen z&rdquo;l (the Chafetz Chaim; died 1933) 
comments on this halachah: The mitzvah of honoring Shabbat 
applies to every individual. It is written (Yeshayah 58:13), 
&ldquo;You shall proclaim the Shabbat an oneg / &lsquo;delight,&rsquo; the holy 
one of Hashem, &lsquo;honored one&rsquo;.&rdquo; \[This teaches that it is a 
mitzvah to honor Shabbat.\] And, it is a general rule that it is 
preferable to perform a mitzvah oneself than to rely on an 
agent.

The Chafetz Chaim continues: One should think thoughts of 
repentance and examine one&rsquo;s deeds every Erev Shabbat, for 
Shabbat is called a &ldquo;bride&rdquo; and greeting the Shabbat is like 
greeting royalty, which one would not do dressed in rags dirtied 
by sin. One should clean away cobwebs on Erev Shabbat, and 
certainly one should dust the house while it is still day. All 
of this falls within the definition of honoring Shabbat. One 
should imagine how one would prepare his house for a visit by a 
human king, and that is how one should prepare for the arrival 
of Shabbat.  (Mishnah Berurah 250:3)

R&rsquo; Mattisyahu Solomon shlita (mashgiach ruchani of Beth 
Medrash Govoha in Lakewood, N.J.) observes: The Chafetz Chaim 
combines a discussion of spiritual preparations for Shabbat with 
a discussion of physical preparations. It would appear that he 
is teaching that cleaning the house is merely a means to awaken 
oneself to cleanse one&rsquo;s soul before Shabbat. Only then can one 
properly greet the King of Kings when He comes to spend the holy 
day with us.  (Matnat Chaim: Shabbat p.9)
