---
layout: post
title: "Devarim 5775 - &ldquo;Forty Years&rdquo;"
date: "2015-07-25"
author: skatz
sponsor: "Nathan and Rikki Lewin<br>in memory of his mother<br>Pessel bat Naftali Sternheim Lewin a&rdquo;h"
learning: "Nach: Eichah<br>Mishnah: Parah 1:3-4<br>Daf Yomi (Bavli): Nedarim 62<br>Halachah: Mishnah Berurah 630:11-13"
volume: 29
issue: 39
pdf: "Devarim 5775"
---

The midrash Yalkut Shimoni comments on the verse in our 
parashah (1:2), &ldquo;Eleven days from Horev \[i.e., Har Sinai\], by 
way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-Barnea,&rdquo; as follows: Rabbi Yehuda 
says, &ldquo;If Bnei Yisrael had merited, they would have entered 
Eretz Yisrael in three days, as it is written (Bemidbar 10:33), 
&lsquo;The Ark of the Covenant of Hashem journeyed before them a 
three-day distance to search out for them a resting place.&rsquo; &lsquo;A 
resting place&rsquo; can only mean Eretz Yisrael, as we read (Devarim 
12:9), &lsquo;For you have not yet come to the resting place or to the 
heritage that Hashem, your Elokim, gives you&rsquo;.&rdquo; Rabbi Bena&rsquo;ah 
says, &ldquo;If Bnei Yisrael had merited, they would have entered 
Eretz Yisrael in one day, as it is written (Shmot 13:4-5), 
&lsquo;Today you are leaving \[Egypt\], in the month of springtime. And 
it shall come to pass, when Hashem will bring you to the land . 
. .&rsquo;&rdquo; Rabbi Yose ben Chanan says, &ldquo;If Bnei Yisrael had merited, 
they would have entered Eretz Yisrael the moment they had 
stepped out of the Yam Suf, as it is written (in our parashah--
1:21), &lsquo;Go up \[from the sea\] and possess \[the Land\]&rsquo;.&rdquo; \[Until 
here from the midrash.\]

R&rsquo; Chaim Palagi z&rdquo;l (1788-1868; rabbi of Izmir, Turkey) 
writes: Just as one is rewarded for each step he takes when he 
walks to the bet ha&rsquo;knesset, so every step one takes on his way 
to Eretz Yisrael is a mitzvah, and an angel is created from that 
step. Had Bnei Yisrael entered Eretz Yisrael quickly, as the 
various opinions in the midrash suggest, they would have lost 
that merit. Even so, the additional 40 years of performing the 
agricultural mitzvot in Eretz Yisrael that they would have 
gained would have far outweighed the merit of taking extra steps 
on the way to the Land.  (Artzot Ha&rsquo;chaim p.24)

********

> &ldquo;The days that we traveled from Kadesh Barnea until we 
> crossed Zered Brook were thirty eight years--until the 
> end of the entire generation, the men of war, from the 
> midst of the camp, as Hashem swore to them. (2:14)

R&rsquo; Aharon Lewin z&rdquo;l Hy&rdquo;d (1879-1941; rabbi of Rzeszow, 
Poland and member of the Polish parliament; killed in the 
Holocaust) asks: Kadesh Barnea is the place from which the Spies 
were dispatched and where Bnei Yisrael were encamped when Hashem 
decreed that they would wander in the desert for 40 years. Bnei 
Yisrael were in the desert for a total of 40 years (less five 
days). But, the incident of the Spies occurred 16 months after 
the Exodus, meaning that the period after the incident of the 
Spies was only 38 years and eight months. As our verse says, 
&ldquo;The days that we traveled from Kadesh Barnea until we crossed 
Zered Brook were thirty eight years&rdquo;! What happened to the 
remainder of the 40 years?

R&rsquo; Lewin explains: Rashi z&rdquo;l himself was bothered by this 
question, and he explains (in his commentary to Bemidbar 14:33): 
&ldquo;Hashem &lsquo;contemplated&rsquo; this decree from the moment they made the 
Golden Calf, but He waited for them \[i.e., He postponed their 
punishment\] until their measure of sin was full.&rdquo; The Golden 
Calf was made in the first year following the Exodus. If the 
first year is counted, Bnei Yisrael were punished for 40 years.

However, R&rsquo; Lewin asks on Rashi&rsquo;s explanation: The 
arithmetic still doesn&rsquo;t work, as the golden calf was not made 
until the seventeenth of Tammuz, three months after the Exodus!

He explains: Bnei Yisrael were &ldquo;sentenced&rdquo; to remain in the 
desert for 40 years because the Spies traveled for 40 days–a 
year for each day, or a month for each daylight hour. (The Spies 
did not travel at night.) Rashi (to Bemidbar 13:3) writes that 
when the Spies began their mission, they were still righteous. 
We can assume therefore that they davened before setting out on 
their journey, perhaps even a long davening that occupied the 
first three hours of the day. That would mean their mission 
lasted 40 days less three hours. At the rate of a month for each 
hour, three months had to be subtracted from their time in the 
desert. Thus, the total punishment--from the seventeenth of 
Tammuz in the first year until they entered Eretz Yisrael--
lasted 40 years minus three months.  (Ha&rsquo;drash Ve&rsquo;ha&rsquo;iyun)

********

> From the Haftarah . . .

> &ldquo;The vision of Yeshayahu son of Amotz, which he saw 
> concerning Yehuda and Yerushalayim, in the days of 
> Uzziah, Yotam, Achaz and Chizkiyah, kings of Yehuda.&rdquo;  
> (Yeshayah 1:1)

The Gemara (Bava Batra 14b) describes the Book of Yeshayah 
as consisting entirely of consolation for the destruction of the 
Bet Hamikdash and the exile. Yet, our haftarah, the first 
chapter of that book, is full of rebuke and foreboding! Does 
this not contradict the Gemara?

R&rsquo; Moshe David Valle z&rdquo;l (1697-1777; Italy) explains:
The name of the prophet Yeshayah is related to the word 
&ldquo;yeshuah,&rdquo; which connotes redemption. This similarity indicates 
that the soul of this prophet came from the &ldquo;side&rdquo; of chessed, 
meaning that his soul was predisposed to chessed / kindness 
Accordingly, his prophecies are full of hope.

True, Yeshayah opens his book with a seemingly negative 
prophecy. Even his rebuke, however, has its source in chessed. 
To what may this be compared? To a mother who punishes her child 
and then embraces him in a tight hug. When we see that, we 
understand that the punishment originates from the same love 
from which the hug later came.  (Teshuat Olamim)

********

> From the Tisha B&rsquo;Av Haftarah . . .
> &ldquo;I overpower sorrow, my heart is sick within me. 
> Behold! the voice of my people&rsquo;s daughter from distant 
> lands . . . If only someone would turn my head to 
> water and my eye to a spring of tears, then I would 
> cry all day and night for the slain of my daughter&rsquo;s 
> people.&rdquo; (Yirmiyah 8:18-19, 23)

R&rsquo; Dov Berish Weidenfeld z&rdquo;l (1881-1965; the &ldquo;Tschebiner 
Rov&rdquo;) lost four of his children and their families in the 
Holocaust. He once commented about that event, paraphrasing our 
verses: I could overpower sorrow, if only my heart was sick 
within me. However, I am broken over the voice of my people&rsquo;s 
daughter, over the destruction of my nation. If only someone 
would turn my head to water and my eye to a spring of tears, 
then I would cry all day and night for the slain of my 
daughter&rsquo;s people.&rdquo;  (Quoted in Sar Ha&rsquo;Torah p.163)

********

Shemittah

> &ldquo;Exile comes to the world because of idolatry, 
> adultery, murder, and \[failure to observe\] shemittah.&rdquo;  
> (Avot, ch. 5)

We are taught that Hashem punishes man for his sins middah 
k&rsquo;negged middah, i.e., the punishment fits the crime. On the 
simplest level, we can understand that one who transgresses the 
mitzvah of shemittah--a mitzvah specific to the Land of Israel--
deserves to be exiled from that Land. However, R&rsquo; Yisrael Meir 
Lau shlita (former Ashkenazic Chief Rabbi of Israel) suggests a 
deeper connection:

One purpose of the mitzvah of shemittah is to strengthen 
man&rsquo;s emunah / faith in G-d. Owning land and seeing it produce 
crops year after year gives a person a certain sense of power 
and security, thereby causing him to forget Hashem&rsquo;s role in his 
success. By not sowing the fields for one year, one acknowledges 
that the fields belong to Hashem and all sustenance comes from 
Him.

One who does not observe shemittah needs to learn the same 
lesson another way. Exile is meant to deprive a person of the 
sense of power and security that he had when he was a landowner.

\[The prophet Yirmiyah foretold the first period of exile 
from Eretz Yisrael which our ancestors experienced. Based on 
Vayikra 26:34, our Sages say that one of the sins that caused 
that exile was the failure to observe shemittah\]. Thus we read 
in Yirmiyah (5:1), &ldquo;Walk about in the streets of Yerushalayim, 
see now and know, and seek in its plazas; if you will find a 
man, if there is one who dispenses justice and seeks emunah, 
then I will forgive the \[the city\].&rdquo; Had the inhabitants of 
Yerushalayim in the time of Yirmiyah possessed emunah, the exile 
would not have been necessary.  (Yachel Yisrael V, p.152)
