---
layout: post
title: "Bo 5761"
volume: 15
issue: 15
date: "February 3, 2001"
sponsor: "Irving and Arline Katz<br>in memory of grandmother Henia Rachel bat Pinchas Spalter a&rdquo;h"
learning: "Ketubot 5:4-5<br>Orach Chaim 370:5-7<br>Daf Yomi (Bavli): Sotah 44<br>Daf Yomi (Yerushalmi): Shevuot 40"
---

We read in this week's parashah of the mitzvah to sacrifice a
Korban Pesach and to observe certain laws while eating the meat
of the sacrifice.  We also read of the commandment that the Jews
in Egypt place some of the blood of the Korban Pesach on the
lintels and doorposts of their homes.  Immediately following
this, we read (12:28), "Bnei Yisrael went and did as Hashem
commanded Moshe and Aharon, so did they do."

Rashi comments that the phrase, "So did they do," refers to
Moshe and Aharon, i.e., Moshe and Aharon, too, did as Hashem had
commanded.  What is this teaching us? asks R' Moshe Feinstein z"l
(died 1986).  Would I have thought that Moshe and Aharon did not
fulfill Hashem's command?  He explains:

There are some who argue that more people can be attracted to
believe in Hashem and to observe some of the mitzvot if we do not
demand full observance, or if we rule leniently even when such a
ruling is not halachically justified.  This is wrong, says R'
Feinstein.  Indeed, it is the desire of the yetzer hara that
people not be meticulous in their mitzvah observance.  This is
what the verse is teaching: Moshe and Aharon did not attempt to
modify Hashem's command in order to influence the weaker members
of their generation; they did exactly as Hashem commanded.

Or: There are those who argue that the mitzvot are only for
those who need them, but if one can believe in Hashem without the
mitzvot, he can modify or even disregard the law.  This too is
wrong, for certainly Moshe and Aharon did not "need" a Korban
Pesach in order to remember the Exodus.  Nevertheless, Moshe and
Aharon did as Hashem commanded.  (Darash Moshe)

********

"Hashem said to Moshe and Aharon in the land of Egypt,
saying, 'This month shall be for you the beginning of the
months . . .'" (12:1)

Why, asks R'  Yisrael Dan Taub shlita (the "Modzitzer Rebbe"),
was the mitzvah of kiddush hachodesh / sanctifying the new moon
given specifically in Egypt?  And, why was it given specifically
when the Jewish People were "naked and bare" (see Yechezkel
16:7), i.e., devoid of mitzvot?  He explains:

The midrash (Devarim Rabbah 2:14) relates that when the
ministering angels asked Hashem when Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur
would fall, Hashem answered: "You're asking Me?  You and I will
go to the earthly bet din / court \[and ask them when they will
sanctify the new moon, which, in turn, will determine when the
holidays will fall\]."  This teaches, says R' Taub, that through
the mitzvah of kiddush hachodesh the Jewish People reach a level
where even the ministering angels need them.

The Sages teach that Bnei Yisrael in Egypt fell to the 49th
level of tumah / impurity.  When Hashem wanted to elevate the
Jewish People from that level to the 49th level of holiness (the
highest that an ordinary mortal can reach), He gave them the
mitzvah of kiddush hachodesh through which they could rise to a
level higher than the angels.  This is why Hashem gave Bnei
Yisrael this mitzvah in Egypt.

Rashi writes that when Hashem taught Moshe this mitzvah, He
showed Moshe "the moon in its smallness."  This teaches, R' Taub
explains, that the way to rise to a lofty plane is through
humility (i.e., smallness). Another matter hinted at in Rashi's
comment is that just as the moon is sanctified when it is at its
smallest (i.e., at the new moon), so, even when the Jewish People
have fallen to the lowest levels of tumah and are devoid of
mitzvot, they can still sanctify themselves.  Even at such a
time, a Jew should fulfill the mitzvot; he should not wait until
he has reached a lofty spiritual level.
(Quoted at www.modzitz.org)

********

"Hashem will pass through to smite Egypt, and He will see
the blood that is on the lintel and the two doorposts . . .
You shall observe this matter as a decree for yourself and
for your children forever."  (12:23-24)

R' Asher Anshel Katz z"l (Hungary; early 20th century)
observes: We do not observe the ritual of placing blood on the
lintel and the doorposts every year "forever."  To the contrary,
that was done only once, in Egypt.  Rather, the verse is teaching
us about an attitude that we should have.

Chazal praise the courage displayed by Bnei Yisrael in
slaughtering lambs for the Pesach sacrifice, and advertising
their deeds by placing the blood on the lintel and doorposts.
Lambs, after all, were sacred to the Egyptians.  It is this
courage and commitment which we are enjoined to observe "as a
decree" for ourselves and for our children forever.
(Haggadah Shel Pesach Chodesh Ha'aviv p.132)

********

"It was at midnight, that Hashem smote all the firstborn in
the land of Egypt . . ." (12:29)

R' Menachem Mendel Schneerson z"l (1789-1866; the third
"Lubavitcher Rebbe"; known as the "Tzemach Tzeddek") writes:  The
Jews in Egypt had sunk to the 49th gate of impurity until,
morally and spiritually, they were virtually indistinguishable
from the Egyptians.  Thus, when Hashem passed over the homes of
the Jewish firstborn and killed only the Egyptian firstborn, the
Divine attribute of justice argued: "How are these \[the Jews\] any
different from these \[the Egyptians\]?  These are idol-
worshippers, and these are idol-worshippers!"

Nevertheless, Hashem chose to extract the Bnei Yisrael from
Egypt and acquire them as His people.  This is why the plague of
the firstborn occurred precisely at midnight.  Kabbalists teach
that the first half of the night relates  to the Divine attribute
of gevurah / strictness or justice, while the second half
relates to the Divine attribute of chessed / benevolence.
Midnight is the point that joins and supersedes both attributes,
since the power to join two opposites can only come from
something which transcends their differences. "Midnight" is thus
an expression of a divine involvement in creation that transcends
all standard criteria for punishment or reward.
    (Ohr Ha'Torah
Quoted at www.chabad.org)

********

"And it shall be a sign upon your arm, and an ornament
between your eyes . . ."  (13:16)

The gemara (Menachot 43b) teaches: Bnei Yisrael are beloved \[to
Hashem\], for Hashem has surrounded them with mitzvot: tefilin on
their heads, tefilin on their arms, tzitzit on their garments,
and mezuzot on their doors.  Regarding this, King David said
(Tehilim 119:164), "Seven times a day I have praised You for Your
righteous ordinances." \[Rashi explains: The head tefilin and the
arm tefilin plus the four corners of tzitzit plus one mezuzah
equal seven.\] The sage Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov adds, "If one has
tefilin on his head, tefilin on his arm, tzitzit on his garment,
and a mezuzah on his door, there is a presumption that he will
not sin."

R' Yitzchak Yaakov Reines z"l (1841-1915; rosh yeshiva in Lida,
Belarus and Founder of the Mizrachi) asks: What is it about
tefilin, tzitzit and mezuzah that make the Jew especially beloved
to Hashem?  And, how does the fact that a person performs these
mitzvot create a presumption that he will not sin?  He explains:

A person's tefilin, tzitzit and mezuzah advertise him as a
proud Jew, for one who belongs to a group, a society or a club
does not show off the uniform of that group if he is not proud to
belong to it.  And, one who is proud of his affiliation and his
uniform does not betray the other members of his group for that
embarrasses both the uniform and its wearer.  This is why the
very fact that a person performs these mitzvot creates a
presumption that he will not sin.

A general does not allow a soldier to wear his uniform in
public if he has reason to be ashamed of the soldier.  Thus, the
fact that Hashem has surrounded us with mitzvot -  tefilin,
tzitzit and mezuzot - demonstrates His love for us.
(Ohr Chadash Al Zion, Part VI, Ch. 7, p. 168)

********

Introductions . . .

In this feature, we present excerpts from the introductions to
famous (and not so famous) works.  This week, we present the
third installment of Rambam's introduction to his halachic code,
Mishneh Torah.

From Rav Ashi \[the author of the Babylonian Talmud\] back to
Moshe Rabbenu was forty generations: 1) Rav Ashi; 2) Rava; 3)
Rabbah; 4) Rav Huna; 5) Rabbi Yochanan, Rav and Shmuel; 6)
Rabbenu Hakadosh; 7) his father, Rabban Shimon; 8) his father,
Rabban Gamliel; 9) his father, Rabban Shimon; 10) his father,
Rabban Gamliel the Elder; 11) his father, Rabban Shimon; 12) his
father, Hillel, together with Shammai; 13) Shemayah and Avtalyon;
14) Yehuda \[ben Tabai\] and Shimon \[ben Shetach\]; 15) Yehoshua ben
Perachiah and Nitai of Arbel; 16) Yose ben Yo'ezer and Yosef ben
Yochanan; 17) Antignos \[of Socho\]; 18) Shimon Ha'tzaddik;
19) Ezra; 20) Baruch \[ben Neriah\]; 21) Yirmiyah; 22) Tzefaniah;
23) Chabakuk; 24) Nachum; 25) Yoel; 26) Michah; 27) Yishayah; 28)
Amos; 29) Hoshea; 30) Zechariah; \[Ed. note: Numbers 21 through 29
are the prophets mentioned in the books of Tanach by the same
name.  Number 30 is not the same prophet Zechariah as in the book
by that name.\] 31) Yehoyada; 32) Elisha; 33) Eliyahu; 34)
Achiyah; 35) \[King\] David; 36) Shmuel; 37) Eli; 38) Pinchas; 39)
Yehoshua; 40) Moshe, who received the Torah from Hashem.  Thus,
all can trace their Torah back to Hashem. \[Rambam notes that
Number 34, Achiyah, was a member of the generation of the Exodus
and lived hundreds of years.  Although he actually heard the
Torah being taught by Moshe, he did not attain prominence as a
teacher until after King David's reign.\]

All the sages listed here are simply the greatest ones of their
generations.  Some were heads of yeshivot, some were \[political\]
heads of their generations, and some were members of the
Sanhedrin.  With them in each generation were thousands or tens
of thousands of sages.

Ravina and Rav Ashi \[#1, above\] are the last sages of the
gemara.  Rav Ashi was the one who composed the gemara in the land
of Shinar approximately 100 years after Rabbi Yochanan composed
the Talmud Yerushalmi.  The nature of the two Talmuds is to
explain the words of the Mishnah and its depths, and the matters
which arose in every court from the days of Rabbenu Hakadosh \[who
wrote the Mishnah\] until the gemara was written.

